# *chase-outman.github.io*
## Software Engineering ePortfolio
### *CS499 Computer Science Capstone*

```
```

### *Professional Self-Assessment*

My start in computer science started in early 2019, where waking up one morning after working in retail for 10 years at the time and realizing that I didn’t want to continue on that path, so after that day I decided to enroll in the computer science program at Southern New Hampshire University. I was drawn to computer science because I love to work with technology and I love to solve problems, but I knew from the start that this would be a challenge to complete, since I had no prior experience with any type of programming. After completing this ePortfolio, it was great to see the progress that I have made, from learning my first language with Python, to now knowing how to code with Python, C++, and Java and learning critical skills, including collaborating in a team environment, communicating to stakeholders, data structures and algorithms, software engineering and databases, and secure coding. 
  
My time spent as SNHU wasn’t just working on solo projects, but also working in collaboration with my classmates to create a jukebox program during the course CS-310 Collaboration and Team Project. This course introduced me to using git by teaching me how to clone a repository from git, then create a new branch to add a new feature, and then merge that branch back into the main branch. Also, during the course I got to experience what happens if someone doesn’t retrieve the most updated version of the project before merging their branch back into the main, this was a great learning experience since it gave me the knowledge on how to recover code that was accidentally removed. 
  
By taking the course CS-250 Software Development Lifecycle, I learned about the agile development cycle and the waterfall development cycle, and then compared the pros and cons of both methods. During the course I got to experience each role of a scrum team, from leading the development team as the scrum master, creating code as the developer, testing the use cases as the tester, and then working with stakeholders as the product owner.
My knowledge in data structures and algorithms can be attributed to taking the course CS-250 Data Structures and Algorithms. During this class I learned about space and time complexity with big O notation and how choosing the correct data structure or algorithm can improve the efficiency of an application. One of my projects in this ePortfolio demonstrates this by comparing the time it takes to fill and search a binary search tree verse a HashMap. This course also taught me how to create some basic search algorithms like quick sort and merge sort and analyze their time complexity to determine the most efficient algorithm. 

Until I took the course DAD-220 Introduction to Structed Database Environments I had no knowledge of databases or what SQL even was. During the course I learned the basics of creating a database and the tables within the database, how to how to alter the database with CRUD (Create, Read, Update, Delete), and how to create queries with the JOIN statement to gather data from multiple tables within a database. My experience with databases isn’t just with SQL, but also with MongoDB, this knowledge came from course CS-340 Client/Server Development. This course revolved around creating a MongoDB database and designing a program with Python to interact with the database that allowed a user CRUD functionality to the MongoDB database. 
  
During my time here at SNHU I learned the importance of creating secure code and how to plan and create a security policy, and after going through a code review of older projects to enhance for my ePortfolio, I discovered how unsecure my code really was. This development of a security mindset came from course CS-405 Secure Coding, throughout this course I learned how to secure my code with data validation to protect my program from unwanted or unexpected user inputs, how to design code to prevent a buffer overflow, and how to project your database from an SQL injection attack. 
  
For my ePortfolio I took two artifacts from my data structures and algorithms course (CS-260) and enhance those artifacts to demonstrate by abilities in software engineering, data structures and algorithms, and databases. The first artifact is an application written in C++ that imports data from a CSV file into a binary search tree and the second artifact is similar except that is loads the data into a hash map instead. The following sections will go over in more depth on why I choose these certain artifacts and how enhancing these artifacts will showcase my abilities.

